We now come to the point where we can enjoy the principal talk of our Gilly graduation program
It is entitled the righteous one will get up and we have brother Mark Sanderson of the governing body to deliver that for us
Well for those of you who are
graduating today
This is indeed one of the happiest days of your entire life and
rightly so
Because today represents a wonderful milestone in after a years of faithfully pursuing a spiritual career
But I have to be realistic. I hate to be a downer
at this moment
but realistically
We have to say that not every day
Of your life ahead is going to be as happy as this one
Now, why do we say that?
Well, of course we know that Satan rules this world
And living in this last days that we live in bring us anxiety sometimes even fear
Life is full of what ifs
In fact those two words what if can send us down all kinds of roads that can be quite terrifying
For you are graduating today
Maybe it's something like what if I can't learn the new language
Or what if I can't adapt to a new culture
Or what if I get home and the brothers have a new assignment for me that I'm not expecting
Well, that's for you
But for all of us who are here in this audience and perhaps even for our larger audience via broadcasting
Maybe it's questions like what if I face persecution
Even violent persecution
What if there's a natural disaster
What if I become seriously ill
What if I lose a loved one in death
Well those questions can seem hypothetical
But many of our brothers and sisters around the world are facing those situations right now for them
It's not a matter of what if
It's what is
Well now brothers while it is absolutely certain
That we are going to experience calamities
Because we live in the last days where we expect critical times hard to deal with
There is something that is equally certain
That is know what if
It's a fundamental principle
That applies to every single righteous and faithful servant of Jehovah and that principle can fill us
With confidence and courage
Now what is this principle? We open your Bibles. Let's look at Proverbs chapter 24
As you're turning your Bibles there
I'll just remind you that in the Proverbs many of these proverbial thoughts actually are made up of two verses
And so this one begins in verse 15 it begins actually with the warning and this is what it says
Do not wickedly lie in ambush near the home of the righteous one
Do not destroy his place of rest
Now why? Why is it that you should not attack the righteous one
When I'll notice the reason and here's this fundamental truth
For the righteous one may fall seven times and he will get up again
But the wicked will be made to stumble by calamity
When I'll let's take this verse apart. What is it really trying to tell us for example? What does it mean to fall
The March 15, 2013 watchtower commenting on Proverbs 24, 16
Defined fall as an adversity or a setback
One reference work says falls is the word that can simply mean falls over
Or falls down
But it also has a figurative meaning of now notices
Experiences disaster
Or ruin and that is the sense here
Well, what does it mean then to get up
That same reference work goes on to say likewise rises again can mean simply gets up after falling down
But here it has the figurative sense
Of overcomes adversity or becomes prosperous again
One now why seven times
The same reference work says most translations render seven times literally
But the figure seven probably has its Hebrew symbolic meaning in this context namely
completeness
For that reason some translations read
Even if a righteous person falls down many times
He will always get up
The contemporary English version says
Even if good people fall seven times they will get back up
But when trouble strikes the wicked
That's the end of them
So what is Proverbs 24 15 and 16 trying to tell us well basically
That when a wicked person
Experiences calamity he's conquered
He will not get up
But that is not the case for a righteous one
A righteous person will get up he will not give up
He will overcome calamity
And he will come become prosperous
Again in fact verse 15 in effect says
Don't even try to set a trap for the righteous one
Because no matter how hard you knock him down
He's going to get up again
Now why why is it that the righteous one gets up is it because he's just so strong he's just so personally resilient no
I want you to look at the cross reference
On Proverbs 24 16 you see the scripture
It's Psalm 34 verse 19
Now here the Psalmist David expresses a similar thought to what we just read here in Proverbs
But he adds an important detail
That verse says many are the hardships
Or if you look at the footnote
calamities of the righteous one
But Jehovah rescues him from them all
So Jehovah helps the righteous one to get up
In fact if we go back to that March 15 2013 watchdower
When it commented on Proverbs 24 16
It's that Jehovah will not allow those trusting in him to stumble or to experience a fall
That is an adversity or a setback in their worship
From which they cannot recover
When I'm brothers, what does that mean?
Does it mean that somehow Jehovah is going to intervene miraculously
Every time one of his servants experiences calamity? No
But Jehovah has taught his righteous ones what they need to do in times of calamity
They know that they must keep on seeking first God's kingdom
And God's righteousness as Matthew 633 says and so what does the righteous one do when calamity comes
You see it doesn't stop the righteous one from praying
It doesn't stop him from attending meetings or talking to others about his faith
No, he keeps on doing what pleases Jehovah even in the face of calamity
And doing what is right
Is what helps him to recover from whatever calamity may come upon him
Now the Apostle Paul is a wonderful example of the truth of this principle
Let's look at 2nd Corinthians chapter 11 and let's just remind ourselves
Of some of the calamities that came upon the Apostle Paul
2nd Corinthians 11
Let's begin reading in verse 23 Paul says are they ministers of Christ?
I reply like a madman. I am more outstandingly one. I have done more work
Been in prison more often suffered countless beatings and experienced many near deaths
Five times I received 40 strokes less one from the Jews
Three times I was beaten with rods
Once I was stoned
Three times I experienced shipwreck
A night and a day I have spent in the open sea
In journeys often
Endangers from rivers
Endangers from robbers
Endangers from my own people
Endangers from the nations
Endangers in the city
Endangers in the wilderness
Endangers at sea
Endangers among false brothers
In labor and toil in sleepless nights often
In hunger and thirst
Frequently without food
In cold
And lacking clothing
When out brothers honestly
Many people would have been conquered by just one of those things, isn't it true
But Paul kept getting up he kept getting up and going on
And what was his conclusion? We'll just read it in second Corinthians
chapter four
And look at here at verse eight
Paul says we are hard pressed in every way
But not cramped beyond movement
We are perplexed
But not absolutely with no way out
We are persecuted
But not abandoned and now notice this one
We are knocked down
But not destroyed
Always
We endure in our body the death-dealing treatment that Jesus suffered
That the life of Jesus may also be made manifest
in our body
Did you see that?
Knocked down
But not destroyed
Righteous Paul was not destroyed
By the adverse experiences that came to him
He didn't allow calamity
To stop him from giving that next witness
From offering that next prayer to Jehovah
From taking advantage of the next opportunity
To meet with his brothers
You see that's what a righteous person does
He keeps on seeking Jehovah, seeking to please him
And because Paul did that
He was always able to get up
With the help of Jehovah
But now brothers that's true for Paul
But it's also true for every one of God's faithful
And righteous servants all around this earth
I'd like to introduce to you
Three different faithful servants of Jehovah
Who have also experienced the truth
Of Proverbs chapter 24 and verse 16
This is brother Michael Legaspi from the Philippines
When typhoon high-end struck in 2013
Michael went with his wife
And his young son to the kingdom hall
In Takloban city to seek shelter
There had been many typhoons before
This was not an unusual event in the Philippines
But this time there was something different
This was the first time in recent memory
That there was a storm surge
A wall of water
15 feet high
Or four and a half meters high
Struck the kingdom hall
The walls and the roof collapsed
Michael worked very very hard
To try to rescue his wife
And the other brothers and sisters that were trapped under the debris
But sadly his wife had already perished
Then in the water by this time
He heard his son cry out to him
Papa Papa
He reached out
And he grabbed him in the water
But because of his exhaustion
From already helping the brothers to escape
From under the debris
And because of the cold temperature of the water
He became unconscious
And when he woke up
His son was gone
He too had perished in the storm
Well at first Michael was inconsolable
He blamed himself
He felt that there was something more that he could have done
To save them
But the elders shepherded him
They helped him to see that there was nothing
That he could have done
The storm was beyond the power of any man
But even in those difficult times
Michael continued with his spiritual program
He continued to serve as an elder
And as a regular pioneer
The brothers encouraged him
Why don't you begin to volunteer at the disaster relief center
The whole area was completely devastated
All the homes had been destroyed
Michael got busy
And worked to help rebuild the homes of the local brothers
And when that work was finished
He enrolled as a construction volunteer
Working with a group of brothers
Building kingdom halls within the region
And then when that work was complete
He volunteered to help a congregation
That was quite a distance away
It required him to travel one and a half hours
Each way by motorcycle
But he was willing to do it because the congregation
Needed the help of an elder
When out here
Is Michael today
Busy
Active
In Jehovah's service
Just like all righteous ones
Michael kept doing Jehovah's will
Despite the terrible calamity that he experienced
Now what do you think brothers
Do you think Michael got up
This is Timur Akmedov
Who lives in Kazakhstan
In 2017 Timur was arrested on a false charge
Of inciting religious hatred
After being in pretrial detention for three months
Timur was sentenced to a five year prison term
Before his arrest
Timur was being treated for cancer
When he was arrested his treatment stopped
And the disease began to progress
Now you talk about calamity
Not only is he imprisoned because of his faith
He also has to deal with life
Threatening cancer at the same time
After being in
After being held for 13 months
Timur was finally allowed to go to another city
For medical care
Now here
You see Timur after surgery in his hospital bed
But do you notice
He's chained
Both at the arm
And at the leg
After the courts had rejected multiple
Appeals to have Timur released
It appeared that it was impossible
All options had been exhausted
Yet Timur was told at this point
You can be released
If you're willing to sign a confession
The authorities told him to write out
That he had made a mistake
In speaking to other people about his beliefs
And that he was now sorry for his actions
Timur absolutely refused
He told the authorities that he would rather sit in prison with a clear conscience
Than be released with a guilty one
Well by Jehovah's undeserved kindness
After 14 and a half months in prison
The president of Kazakhstan
Gave Timur a full pardon
Without any admission of guilt
And he was released
Here you see
Timur in a recent photo
Taken with his dear wife
What was it
That helped Timur to get up
Despite imprisonment
And dealing with life-threatening illness
This is what he said
We each have a choice
Whether to stand by God's principles
Or ignore them
If we stand by God's principles
Then we can get through any test
Successfully
Timur
Overcame the adversity
Would you agree?
He truly got up
This is sister Laura French
She began Bethel's service
On May 1st 1926
She was part of this small Bethel family in Canada
Made up of less than 20 persons
About 1936
It became apparent that the branch servant in Canada
Was in apostate
In time the matter was investigated
And although sister French was not involved with the apostasy
She had been a roommate with one of the sisters
Who was working closely with the branch servant
Thus she was wrongly viewed
As one of his supporters
And so on May 1st 1936
She was among a group of seven Bethelites
Who were dismissed from Bethel
Along with the branch servant
What did sister French do?
She never complained
She did not say that it was unfair
Or unjust
Although she said initially she was hurt
She decided that the best remedy would be
To go on serving Jehovah
She said after leaving Bethel
I had four marvelous years in the Pioneer service
The first two years
She and another sister lived in a tent
While preaching in a large area
Where there were no congregations of Jehovah's people
Later she and her pioneer partner work from a house car
These faithful sisters truly work hard for Jehovah
Well in 1940 sister French came to Toronto for a short vacation
When suddenly the ban on Jehovah's Witnesses struck
To her surprise and delight
She was invited to come and work at the underground branch office
And with the approval of brother Rutherford
Sister French returned to Bethel's service in 1940
And continued to serve there until she finished her earthly course on December 23rd
At the end of her earthly life
She said she was so happy
That she had decided to go pioneering
When she was dismissed from Bethel
Of that group that were dismissed
She was the only one who continued to serve Jehovah faithfully
Sister French kept doing the right thing
Even when she was misjudged by others
She overcame an unjust situation
She overcame that adversity
She truly got up. Do you agree?
Well brothers, what have we learned?
From considering this principle in Proverbs chapter 24 and verse 16
When calamity strikes
You truly may feel knocked down
You may not know the details of exactly how everything is going to work out
But you will always know what to do next
You'll know how to pray
You'll know to go to that next meeting
You'll know to go out in the ministry
You'll know to always make decisions that will please Jehovah
And as you do so
Jehovah will show you the way to move on
And to get up from any calamity that you might face
That was true of the Apostle Paul
That was true of Michael Legaspi
It was true of Timurak Medov
It was true of Laura French
And it will be true for all of you
Remember this
When calamity knocks you down
Seek Jehovah and you'll rebound
What does the principle say
For though the righteous one
May fall seven times
He will get up
again
And with that confidence in your hearts
May you go to your assignments
With all of our love
And with the rich blessing
Of our marvelous
Our amazing God
Jehovah
Well that brings us now
To the point in our program for the presentation of the diplomas
And I will be assisted in this by
Our dear brother Kenneth Flodin
First couple is brother and sister Agarwal
They'll be returning to India
And we have brother
But Sakan will go back to Mongolia
Brother and sister Cheposa will return to Zambia
Brother and sister Chico going back to Romania
Brother and sister Dylan
Returning to India
And now we have brother and sister
Grawishevsky going back to Finland
Brother and sister Dredge will be returning to Thailand
And this is brother and sister
Happier in me
They're going back to Rwanda
Brother Horbath
Back to Hungary
And brother, you're Kinsky to Poland
And this is brother and sister Lofran Shua
And they will now be serving in
Korea
Brothers sister Lokeao
Are going to the Philippines
Brothers sister Ledlow are going to be returning to Myanmar
And brother and sister Imkulichi
Will be returning to Malawi
And brother and sister Morgan will now be serving in Kenya
And we have sister Palma
She'll be returning to the Philippines
Brother and sister Perran will now be serving in Senegal
Brother and sister Pernomo will be going to India
Indonesia
I was influenced by the video
And brother and sister Sandoval will now be going to Spain
Brother Sasaki will be returning to Japan
And brother and sister Sando
Will be going back to Trinidad and Tobago
Brother and sister Siva Kumaran
Will be returning to Sri Lanka
And now we have brother and sister Wilson
And they're going to be assigned to Congo Kinshasa
Brother and sister Wuzli
They'll now be assigned to Asia
And now we have our final couple
Brother and sister Jino Nuz
They'll be going to Greece
And we want to thank brother Flodin
for caring for all those names
for me
That's such a big help
Well now it's a pleasure to present to you
the graduates of the 146th class of Gilead
And the class has a letter that will now be read
And brother Philip Morgan will do that for us
To the governing body and the United States' Bethel family
Over the course of the past five months
More than ever before
We have been tuned to the evidence of Jahaova's powerful holy spirit
All around us
From the day we entered the main lobby here at the Watchtower Educational Center
The fruitage of that spirit enveloped us
With love
Kindness through the hospitality of the United States' Bethel family
Without your daily help and encouragement
We would not have been able to give such concentrated focus to our studies
We thank you all from the bottom of our hearts
We also sensed how our instructors
Have striven to allow the holy spirit to shape and mold them
Even as they shared the benefits of their own deep study of God's word
And experience with us each day in the classroom
Just like those Jahaova used to train others in the past
They imparted to us not only the finer points of the truth
But their very souls
They became beloved to us
Even as we know we are to them
Perhaps most touching has been the personal attention shown to us by your dear brothers of the governing body
The evidence of Jahaova's spirit working through you
Is something we will cherish for the rest of our lives
We realize how much concern you carry with you
For the entire association of our brothers worldwide
As well as for the many sheep like ones yet to be reached with the kingdom good news
We especially appreciated the fact
That you each took time to spend with our class
And spoke to us as a father to children
To reassure us
To protect us with reminders
And to build confidence that Jahaova will be with us in the days ahead
And you sent many of your helpers to do just the same
Which we deeply appreciated
The Apostle Paul reminded his anointed brothers
That where the spirit of Jahaova is
There is freedom
Now more than ever we see evidence of how true that is
By means of his faithful slave
The Giliad arrangement
And this beautiful Bethel family
Jahaova has used his spirit
To free us from any inhibitions
Fears or hesitations
We feel more prepared to accomplish whatever work he assigns
By relying on that most powerful force in the universe
God's Holy Spirit
Along with the rest of God's family of servants
Heavenly and earthly
We are ready to follow the leading of that spirit
Wherever it will send us in the days ahead
With heartfelt love
We are your brothers and sisters
Of the 146th class of Giliad
Graduates
That is a nice sound to it, doesn't it
It came quickly
Well, I've been asked to give a few comments here at the end and to include
This point, so I'll begin with it
Back in 2011
The governing body adjusted the objective of Giliad training
In order to help further strengthen and stabilize
The field and branch organization
And as a result
We have seen Jahaova's rich blessing on this adjustment
As it relates to branching country committees worldwide
Since the time of the graduation of the 132nd class
182 graduates
Have been appointed to a committee either during
Or sometime after their training at Giliad
That's a wonderful fact, isn't it
And it's something that is really proving to be a blessing
To the worldwide field in our dear brotherhood
And above all
In upholding and honoring Jahaova's name
So this is a marvelous arrangement
Now with this in mind just for a couple of minutes
I want to give concluding comments on this topic
Maintain your shield of faith
You see when you're settled into your assignments
Perhaps with new responsibilities
Remember to remain watchful
So that you stay focused on what is most important
Namely the doing of Jahaova's will
The danger can come when we feel that we've achieved most or even all of our spiritual goals
If we allow that to happen
Our interests could turn to other things
For example, if we lose sight of the point and the purpose behind what it means to follow Jesus
We could start to center our thoughts on other goals. It could happen
Perhaps even material things
But don't let this happen to you
Keep your shield of faith strong
And Bible times
Soldiers repaired and secured their shields between battles
They treasured those protective pieces of armor
Because their shields were often covered with leather
The soldiers would rub oil onto the shield to help preserve it
And to keep the metal parts free from rust
If a soldier found damage or weakness what did he do
He immediately made the needed repairs to his shield
In this way he was always ready for the next battle
We need to keep this up in a spiritual way
Over time a brother or sister might lay down his or her shield of faith
And go after things that have no lasting value
The devil wants nothing more for us
Then to neglect our faith
And open up our heart to his attacks and for this reason
Paul the Apostle Paul was inspired to say
That those who go after
Material riches for instance would cultivate many senseless and harmful desires
He added flee from these things
You see ultimately we are each responsible for how large
How strong our shield of faith proves to be
Now we show that we are strengthening our faith in Jehovah and his Son
When we take time to continue caring for our spiritual needs
So don't take liberties with your spiritual routine
Just because you've graduated from this wonderful school
Don't become self-satisfied because of resting on a privilege you may come to enjoy
That's not the point of it is it
Keep growing as a spiritual person by giving attention to your faith day by day
Oil and preserve your shield
By regularly attending Christian meetings and speaking about Jehovah's name and his kingdom to others
Also maintain strong faith by reading God's word every day as you've been encouraged and have been doing
And applying its counsel on all that you do
imitate the Christ every step of the way
And this way you'll be like the victorious soldier who worked hard
To care for his shield and other valuable pieces of armor
Hold your shield firmly in front of you
Use it to protect your figurative heart and to defend Jehovah's pure worship
Keep it well maintained
And you will always be ready to fight the fine fight of the faith
Jehovah and his Son will bless you for it